the title  is The women on platform number 8,.

It was my second year at boarding school, and I was sitting on platform number 8 at Ambala station,
waiting for the northern bound train. I think I was about twelve at the time. My parents considered me
old enough to travel alone, and I had arrived by bus at Ambala early in the evening now there was a
wait till midnight before my train arrived. Most of the time I had been pacing up and down the platform, browsing at the book stall, or feeding broken biscuits to stray dogs trains came and went,
and the platform would be quiet for a while and then, when a train arrived, it would be an inferno of
heaving, shouting, agitated human bodies. As the carriage doors opened, a tide of people would
sweep down upon the nervous little ticket" "collector at the gate; and every time this happened I would
be caught in the rush and swept outside the station. Now tired of this game and of ambling about the
platform, I sat down on my suitcase and gazed dismally across the railway" "tracks.
Trolleys rolled past me, and I was conscious of the cries of the various vendors  the men who
sold curds and lemon, the sweet meat seller, the newspaper boy  but I had lost interest in all that
went on along the busy platform, and continued to stare across the railway" "tracks, feeling bored and a
little lonely.
‘Are you all alone, my son?’ asked a soft voice close behind me.
I looked up and saw a woman standing near me. She was leaning over, and I saw a pale face, and
dark kind eyes. She wore no jewels, and was dressed very simply in a white sari.
‘Yes, I am going to school,’ I said, and stood up respectfully; she seemed poor, but there was a
dignity about her that commanded respect.
‘I have been watching you for some time,’she said. ‘Didn’t your parents come to see you off?’
‘I don’t live here,’ I said. ‘I had to change trains. Anyway, I can travel alone.’
‘I am sure you can,’she said, and I liked her for saying that, and I also liked her for the simplicity
of her dress, and for her deep, soft voice and the serenity of her face.
‘Tell me, what is your name?’she asked.
‘Arun,’ I said.
‘And how long do you have to wait for your train?’
‘About an hour, I think. It comes at twelve o’clock.’
‘Then come with me and have something to eat.’
I was going to refuse, out of shyness and suspicion, but she took me by the hand, and then I felt it
would be silly to pull my hand away. She told a coolie to look after my suitcase, and then she led me
away down the platform. Her hand was gentle, and she held mine neither too firmly nor too lightly. I
looked up at her again. She was not young. And she was not old. She must have been over thirty but,
had she been fifty, I think she would have looked much the same.
She took me into the station dining" "room, ordered tea and samosas and jalebies, and at once I
began to thaw and take a new interest in this kind woman. The strange encounter had little effect on
my appetite. I was a hungry school boy, and I ate as much as I could in as polite a manner as possible.
She took obvious pleasure in watching me eat, and I think it was the food that strengthened the bond
between us and cemented our friendship, for under the influence of the tea and sweets I began to talk
quite freely, and told her about my school, my friends, my likes and dislikes. She questioned me
quietly from time to time, but preferred listening; she drew me out very well, and I had soon forgotten
that we were strangers. But she did not ask me about my family or where I lived, and I did not ask her
where she lived. I accepted her for what she had been to me  a quiet, kind and gentle woman who
gave sweets to a lonely boy on a railway platform …
After about half" "an" "hour we left the dining" "room and began walking back along the platform. An
engine was shunting up and down beside platform No. 8, and as it approached, a boy leapt off the
platform and ran across the rails, taking a short cut to the next platform. He was at a safe distance
from the engine, and there was no danger unless he had fallen; but as he leapt across the rails, the
woman clutched my arm. Her fingers dug into my flesh, and I winced with pain. I caught her fingers
and looked up at her, and I saw a spasm of pain and fear and sadness pass across her face. She
watched the boy as he climbed other platform, and it was not until he had disappeared in the crowd
that she relaxed her hold on my arm. She smiled at me reassuringly, and took my hand again  but her
fingers trembled against mine.
‘He was all right,’ I said, feeling that it was she who needed reassurance.
She smiled gratefully at me and pressed my hand. We walked together in silence until we reached
the place where I had left my suitcase, one of my schoolfellows, Satish, a boy of about my age, had
turned up with his mother.
‘Hello, Arun!’ he called. ‘The train’s coming in late, as usual. Did you know we have a new
Headmaster this year?’
We shook hands, and then he turned to his mother and said  ‘This is Arun, mother. He is one of my
friends, and the best bowler in the class.’
‘I am glad to know that,’said his mother, a large imposing woman who wore spectacles. She
looked at the woman who led my hand and said  ‘And I suppose you’re Arun’s mother?’
I opened my mouth to make some explanation, but before I could say anything the woman replied 
‘Yes, I am Arun’s mother.’
I was unable to speak a word. I looked quickly up at the woman, but she did not appear to be at all
embarrassed, and was smiling at Satish’s mother.
Satish’s mother said  ‘It’s such a nuisance having to wait for the train right in the middle of the
night. But one can’t let the child wait here alone. Anything can happen to a boy at a big station like
this, there are so many suspicious characters hanging about. These days one has to be very careful of
strangers.’
‘Arun can travel alone though,’said the woman beside me, and somehow I felt grateful to her for
saying that. I had already forgiven her for lying  and besides, I had taken an instinctive dislike to
Satish’s mother.
‘Well, be very careful Arun,’said Satish’s mother looking sternly at me through her spectacles. ‘Be
very careful when your mother is not with you. And never talk to strangers!’
I looked from Satish’s mother to the woman who had given me tea and sweets, and then back at
Satish’s mother.
‘I like strangers,’ I said.
Satish’s mother definitely staggered a little, as obviously she was not used to being contradicted by
small boys. ‘There you are, you see! If you don’t watch over them all the time, they’ll walk straight
into trouble. Always listen to what your mother tells you,’she said, wagging a fat little finger at me.
‘And never, never talk to strangers.’
I glared resentfully at her, and moved closer to the woman who had befriended me. Satish was
standing behind his mother, grinning at me, and delighting in my clash with his mother. Apparently he
was on my side.
The station bell clanged, and the people who had till now been squatting resignedly on the platform
began bustling about.
‘Here it comes,’shouted Satish, as the engine whistle shrieked and the front lights played over the
rails.
The train moved slowly into the station, the engine hissing and sending out waves of steam. As it
came to a stop, Satish jumped on the footboard of a lighted compartment and shouted, ‘Come on,
Arun, this one’s empty!’ and I picked up my suitcase and made a dash for the open door.
We placed ourselves at the open windows, and the two women stood outside on the platform,
talking up to us. Satish’s mother did most of the talking.
‘Now don’t jump on and off moving trains, as you did just now,’she said. ‘And don’t stick your
heads out of the windows, and don’t eat any rubbish on the way.’ She allowed me to share the benefit
of her advice, as she probably didn’t think my ‘mother’ a very capable person. She handed Satish a
bag of fruit, a cricket bat and a big box of chocolates, and told him to share the food with me. Then
she stood back from the window to watch how my ‘mother’ behaved.
I was smarting under the patronising tone of Satish’s mother, who obviously thought mine a very
poor family and I did not intend giving the other woman away. I let her take my hand in hers, but I
could think of nothing to say. I was conscious of Satish’s mother staring at us with hard, beady eyes,
and I found myself hating her with a firm, unreasoning hate. The guard walked up the platform,
blowing his whistle for the train to leave. I looked straight into the eyes of the woman who held my
hand, and she smiled in a gentle, understanding way. I leaned out of the window then, and put my lips
to her cheek, and kissed her.
The carriage jolted forward, and she drew her hand away.
‘Gooood byee, mother!’said Satish, as the train began to move slowly out of the station. Satish and his
mother waved to each other.
‘Gooood byeee,’ I said to the other woman, ‘gooood bye mother …’
I didn’t wave or shout, but sat still in front of the window, gazing at the woman on the platform.
Satish’s mother was talking to her, but she didn’t appear to be listening; she was looking at me, as the
train took me away. She stood there on the busy platform, a pale sweet woman in white, and I
watched her until she was lost in the milling crowd.





